README.md, before:

# Butterknife

A wrapper around [node-postgres](https://github.com/brianc/node-postgres) to easily create and query a table from a local json or csv file.

## Usage

### Within Node.js

````
var bk = require('../src/butter-knife.js').connect('pg://postgres@localhost/');

var data = [
	{
		city: "New York",
		temp: [0,35],
		country: 'USA'
	},
	{
		city: 'Los Angeles',
		temp: [15,35],
		country: 'USA'
	},
	{
		city: 'Paris',
		temp: [2,33],
		country: 'France'
	},
	{
		city: 'Marseille',
		temp: [5,27],
		country: 'France'
	},
	{
		city: 'London',
		temp: [2,25],
		country: 'UK'
	}
]

bk.createTable(data, 'cities')

// Get the rows that don't have 15
bk.query('SELECT * FROM cities WHERE 15 != ALL (temp)', function(rows){
	console.log(rows)
	/*[
	  { uid: '1', city: 'New York',     temp: [ 0, 35 ], country: 'USA' },
	  { uid: '3', city: 'Paris',        temp: [ 2, 33 ], country: 'France' },
	  { uid: '4', city: 'Marseille',    temp: [ 5, 27 ], country: 'France' },
	  { uid: '5', city: 'London',       temp: [ 2, 25 ], country: 'UK' } ]*/
})
````

#### Methods

__connect__ _.connect(dbConnectionString)_

Connects Butterknife to your PostgreSQL database. Connection defaults to `pg://postgres:5432@localhost/` and can be configured through `db_config.txt`. Read more about database connections.

__createTable__ _.createTable(dataobject, tablename)_

Syncronously creates a table in your PostgreSQL database

__query__ _.query(queryString, function)_

Queries the database and returns a json object with the query text and the resulting rows.

````
bk.query('SELECT * FROM cities LIMIT 2', function(result){
	console.log(result)
	/*
	{ query: 'SELECT * FROM cities LIMIT 2',
	  rows:
	   [ { uid: '1', city: 'New York', temp: [Object], country: 'USA' },
	     { uid: '2', city: 'Los Angeles', temp: [Object], country: 'USA' } 
     ] 
  }
  */
})
````

__query.each__ _.query.each(queryString, function)_

Same as `.query` except it returns the resulting rows one by one.

````
bk.query.each('SELECT * FROM cities LIMIT 2', function(row){
	console.log(row)
	/*
	{ uid: '1', city: 'New York', temp: [Object], country: 'USA' },
	{ uid: '2', city: 'Los Angeles', temp: [Object], country: 'USA' } 
  */
})
````

__queries__ _.queries(list, function)_

Takes a list of query strings, processes them synchronously and returns them in an array of objects. Each object has the same structure as the result object from `.query`
````
var queries = [
	'SELECT * FROM cities LIMIT 1',
	'SELECT * FROM cities LIMIT 1 OFFSET 1',
]
bk.queries(queries, function(result){
	console.log(result)
/*	[
  {
    "query": "SELECT * FROM cities LIMIT 1",
    "rows": [
      {
        "uid": "1",
        "city": "New York",
        "temp": [
          0,
          35
        ],
        "country": "USA"
      }
    ]
  },
  {
    "query": "SELECT * FROM cities LIMIT 1 OFFSET 1",
    "rows": [
      {
        "uid": "2",
        "city": "Los Angeles",
        "temp": [
          15,
          35
        ],
        "country": "USA"
      }
    ]
  }
]
*/
````

## Command line

````
butterknife -i IN_FILE 
	    -f (csv|json|tsv|psv|DELIMITER) 
	    -n TABLE_NAME 
	    -o OUT_FILE 
	    -q "QUERY" 
	    -s "SCHEMA 
	    -m (create)"
````

__Note: All commands on the database are run with `CREATE TEMP TABLE` so as not to alter your existing PostgreSQL tables.__ Only if you specify `-m create` will a table be added to your database outside of this query session. To delete a table, run `butterknife -q "DROP TABLE <table_name>;"`

### So you want to..

#### Print sql commands

* Specify the `IN_FILE` with `-i`. 

Optionally:

* Specify an input file format or custom delimeter with `-f`. If you don't, Butterknife will attempt to read the file extension -- supports `csv`, `json`, `tsv` and `psv` (pipe-separated values).
* Specify a table name with `-n`. Defaults to `bk` if nothing specified.
* Specify an output file with `-o`. If you don't, sql commands will print to the console.
* Specify a schema with `-s`. If you don't, Butterknife will attempt to read your schema from the specified input file.

#### Query a data file

* Specify the `IN_FILE` with `-i`. 
* Specify the query with `-q`, e.g. `-q "SELECT * FROM butterknife;"`

Optionally:

* Specify an input file format or custom delimeter with `-f`. If you don't, Butterknife will attempt to read the file extension -- supports `csv`, `json`, `tsv` and `psv` (pipe-separated values).
* Specify a table name with `-n`. Defaults to `bk` if nothing specified.
* Specify an output file with `-o`. Name must end in either `.csv` or `.json`. This extension will determine the format of your file. If `-o` not specified, your query result will print to the console.
* Specify a database connection with `-c`. Defaults to `pg://postgres:5432@localhost`. Read more about database connections.


#### Create a table in your PostgreSQL database from a file, optionally querying it

* Specify the `IN_FILE` with `-i`.
* Specify the mode as `CREATE` with `-m CREATE`.

Optionally:

* Specify an input file format or custom delimeter with `-f`. If you don't, Butterknife will attempt to read the file extension -- supports `csv`, `json`, `tsv` and `psv` (pipe-separated values).
* Specify a table name with `-n`. Defaults to `bk` if nothing specified.
* Specify a schema with `-s`. If you don't, Butterknife will attempt to read your schema from the specified input file.
* Specify a query, see "Query an existing PostgresSQL table" for options.
* Specify a database connection with `-c`. Defaults to `pg://postgres:5432@localhost`. Read more about database connections.

#### Query an existing PostgreSQL table

* Specify the query with `-q`, e.g. `-q "SELECT * FROM butterknife;"`

Optionally:

* Specify an output file with `-o`. Name must end in either `.csv` or `.json`. This extension will determine the format of your file. If `-o` not specified, your query result will print to the console.
* Specify a database connection with `-c`. Defaults to `pg://postgres:5432@localhost`. Read more about database connections.


## About database connections

Butterknife defaults to the database at `pg://postgres:5432@localhost`, which gives it acess to the main database of your PostgreSQL installation. In order to better sandbox your Butterknife projects, you might want to create a separate database called `butterknife`. To do this, log into psql by running `psql` on the command line and run `CREATE DATABASE butterknife`. 

Then specify your default connection in `config.txt` to `pg://postgres:5432@localhost/butterknife`. To override this, you can set `bk.connect(<new_connection_string>)` when using Butterknife through nodejs or through `-c <new_connection_string>` through the command line.

You could also obviously set up a different user as well if you don't want to give Butterknife root access. If you have a user called, `mike` that owns a database `butterknife`, your connection string would be `pg://mike:5432@localhost/butterknife`

## TODOs
* Set up `db_config.txt` through something more like `db_config.sample.txt` that won't get overwritten on update.
* Support sqlite, allow that to be configured via `config.json` or through nodejs api.
* Maybe change createTable to createTempTable and createTable? Currently you would set bk.temp(false). Maybe that's an argument passed to createTable

Commit message:

load from config.sample.json unless config.json exists, gitignore config.json, allow for tables to be permanent through createtable arg

README.md, after:

# Butterknife

A wrapper around [node-postgres](https://github.com/brianc/node-postgres) to easily create and query a table from a local json or csv file.

## Usage

### Within Node.js

````
var bk = require('../src/butter-knife.js').connect('pg://postgres@localhost/');

var data = [
	{
		city: "New York",
		temp: [0,35],
		country: 'USA'
	},
	{
		city: 'Los Angeles',
		temp: [15,35],
		country: 'USA'
	},
	{
		city: 'Paris',
		temp: [2,33],
		country: 'France'
	},
	{
		city: 'Marseille',
		temp: [5,27],
		country: 'France'
	},
	{
		city: 'London',
		temp: [2,25],
		country: 'UK'
	}
]

bk.createTable(data, 'cities')

// Get the rows that don't have 15
bk.query('SELECT * FROM cities WHERE 15 != ALL (temp)', function(rows){
	console.log(rows)
	/*[
	  { uid: '1', city: 'New York',     temp: [ 0, 35 ], country: 'USA' },
	  { uid: '3', city: 'Paris',        temp: [ 2, 33 ], country: 'France' },
	  { uid: '4', city: 'Marseille',    temp: [ 5, 27 ], country: 'France' },
	  { uid: '5', city: 'London',       temp: [ 2, 25 ], country: 'UK' } ]*/
})
````

#### Methods

__connect__ _.connect(dbConnectionString)_

Connects Butterknife to your PostgreSQL database. Connection defaults to `pg://postgres:5432@localhost/` and can be configured through `config.json`. Read more about database connections.

__createTable__ _.createTable(dataobject, tablename, tableschema, permanent)_

Syncronously creates a table in your PostgreSQL database. Optionally pass in a __tablename__ (default `bk`) or a __tableschema.__ By default, Butterknife will attempt to read the datatypes in your object. TODO Here's a list of supported datatypes and how they are mapped to SQL datatypes. By default, Butterknife will create a temporary table that exists only for this session. To instead create a permanent table, pass in `true` as boolean to __permanent__.

__query__ _.query(queryString, function)_

Queries the database and returns a json object with the query text and the resulting rows.

````
bk.query('SELECT * FROM cities LIMIT 2', function(result){
	console.log(result)
	/*
	{ query: 'SELECT * FROM cities LIMIT 2',
	  rows:
	   [ { uid: '1', city: 'New York', temp: [Object], country: 'USA' },
	     { uid: '2', city: 'Los Angeles', temp: [Object], country: 'USA' } 
     ] 
  }
  */
})
````

__query.each__ _.query.each(queryString, function)_

Same as `.query` except it returns the resulting rows one by one.

````
bk.query.each('SELECT * FROM cities LIMIT 2', function(row){
	console.log(row)
	/*
	{ uid: '1', city: 'New York', temp: [Object], country: 'USA' },
	{ uid: '2', city: 'Los Angeles', temp: [Object], country: 'USA' } 
  */
})
````

__queries__ _.queries(list, function)_

Takes a list of query strings, processes them synchronously and returns them in an array of objects. Each object has the same structure as the result object from `.query`
````
var queries = [
	'SELECT * FROM cities LIMIT 1',
	'SELECT * FROM cities LIMIT 1 OFFSET 1',
]
bk.queries(queries, function(result){
	console.log(result)
/*	[
  {
    "query": "SELECT * FROM cities LIMIT 1",
    "rows": [
      {
        "uid": "1",
        "city": "New York",
        "temp": [
          0,
          35
        ],
        "country": "USA"
      }
    ]
  },
  {
    "query": "SELECT * FROM cities LIMIT 1 OFFSET 1",
    "rows": [
      {
        "uid": "2",
        "city": "Los Angeles",
        "temp": [
          15,
          35
        ],
        "country": "USA"
      }
    ]
  }
]
*/
````

## Command line

````
butterknife -i IN_FILE 
	    -f (csv|json|tsv|psv|DELIMITER) 
	    -n TABLE_NAME 
	    -o OUT_FILE 
	    -q "QUERY" 
	    -s "SCHEMA 
	    -m (create)"
````

__Note: All commands on the database are run with `CREATE TEMP TABLE` so as not to alter your existing PostgreSQL tables.__ Only if you specify `-m create` will a table be added to your database outside of this query session. To delete a table, run `butterknife -q "DROP TABLE <table_name>;"`

### So you want to..

#### Print sql commands

* Specify the `IN_FILE` with `-i`. 

Optionally:

* Specify an input file format or custom delimeter with `-f`. If you don't, Butterknife will attempt to read the file extension -- supports `csv`, `json`, `tsv` and `psv` (pipe-separated values).
* Specify a table name with `-n`. Defaults to `bk` if nothing specified.
* Specify an output file with `-o`. If you don't, sql commands will print to the console.
* Specify a schema with `-s`. If you don't, Butterknife will attempt to read your schema from the specified input file.

#### Query a data file

* Specify the `IN_FILE` with `-i`. 
* Specify the query with `-q`, e.g. `-q "SELECT * FROM butterknife;"`

Optionally:

* Specify an input file format or custom delimeter with `-f`. If you don't, Butterknife will attempt to read the file extension -- supports `csv`, `json`, `tsv` and `psv` (pipe-separated values).
* Specify a table name with `-n`. Defaults to `bk` if nothing specified.
* Specify an output file with `-o`. Name must end in either `.csv` or `.json`. This extension will determine the format of your file. If `-o` not specified, your query result will print to the console.
* Specify a database connection with `-c`. Defaults to `pg://postgres:5432@localhost`. Read more about database connections.


#### Create a table in your PostgreSQL database from a file, optionally querying it

* Specify the `IN_FILE` with `-i`.
* Specify the mode as `CREATE` with `-m CREATE`.

Optionally:

* Specify an input file format or custom delimeter with `-f`. If you don't, Butterknife will attempt to read the file extension -- supports `csv`, `json`, `tsv` and `psv` (pipe-separated values).
* Specify a table name with `-n`. Defaults to `bk` if nothing specified.
* Specify a schema with `-s`. If you don't, Butterknife will attempt to read your schema from the specified input file.
* Specify a query, see "Query an existing PostgresSQL table" for options.
* Specify a database connection with `-c`. Defaults to `pg://postgres:5432@localhost`. Read more about database connections.

#### Query an existing PostgreSQL table

* Specify the query with `-q`, e.g. `-q "SELECT * FROM butterknife;"`

Optionally:

* Specify an output file with `-o`. Name must end in either `.csv` or `.json`. This extension will determine the format of your file. If `-o` not specified, your query result will print to the console.
* Specify a database connection with `-c`. Defaults to `pg://postgres:5432@localhost`. Read more about database connections.


## About database connections

Butterknife defaults to the database at `pg://postgres:5432@localhost`, which gives it acess to the main database of your PostgreSQL installation. In order to better sandbox your Butterknife projects, you might want to create a separate database called `butterknife`. To do this, log into psql by running `psql` on the command line and run `CREATE DATABASE butterknife`. 

Then specify your default connection in `config.json` to `pg://postgres:5432@localhost/butterknife`. To override this, you can set `bk.connect(<new_connection_string>)` when using Butterknife through nodejs or through `-c <new_connection_string>` through the command line.

You could also obviously set up a different user as well if you don't want to give Butterknife root access. If you have a user called, `mike` that owns a database `butterknife`, your connection string would be `pg://mike:5432@localhost/butterknife`

## TODOs
* Support sqlite, allow that to be configured via `config.json` or through nodejs api.
* Document `config.json` vs `config.sample.json`
* Tests for cli
